Previously when we learned about loading,
we loaded data from the server using
page.server.js and layout.server.js files.
And this is very convenient if you need to
do things like getting data directly from
a database or
reading cookies and and so on.
But sometimes that isn't what you want.
Sometimes it doesn't make sense.
For example, if you're loading data from
an external API that is not your server,
then there's no point going to your
server so that it can then go to
the external API, get the data and
then send it back to the browser.
The browser can just communicate
with that external API directly.
Or maybe you want to use
in-memory data if it's available.
Perhaps you want to delay navigation
until an image has been pre-loaded or
something like that.
Or finally, you might want to return
something from your load function
that cannot be serialized.
So in order to load data from the server,
it needs to come over the network
in a serializable form.
And the svelte kit uses a library called
D-value to turn server data into JSON.
And that gives you more power
than a regular JSON object.
You'd include things like dates and
begins and maps and sets and
regular expressions and so on.
But it can't serialize your own
custom classes and things like that.
So in that situation,
it would make sense to use what's
called a universal load function.
So in this app,
we have a few server load functions
inside these red, green, and blue apps.
And what this load function is doing,
it's importing a component,
namely red.svelte.
And it's trying to return
that from the load function.
But if we navigate to this page,
we're gonna get an error
because a component is not one
of the things that you can serialize and
send from the server to the browser.
The same thing is true if you
navigate to the other pages.
So we need to turn these load functions
into universal load functions, and
we'll do that by renaming
pageservers js to page js.
Like that.
Do the same for green and
the same for blue.
All right, and
now when we navigate to those pages,
we are in fact returning
the component from the load function.
So these load functions are just
like any other function in your app,
you can use them anywhere in any module.
You're not restricted as to
where you can use that data.
So a cool thing that we can
do now that we're returning
a component from our load function.
Is we can use it inside the layout, even
though we're returning it from the page,
because the data is available on
the page store as the data property.
So inside our navigation
bar in the layout.svelte,
we're gonna go down here, and
we're gonna add a new if block.
If a component was returned
from the load function,
And this can be any load function that was
involved in fetching data for this page.
Then we can inject that component
into the navigation bar.
Right, and this is something that's only
possible because we have this separation
between the data fetching process and
the rendering process.
It's something that you can use for
putting a custom menu inside your
navigation bar or adding breadcrumbs and
things like that.
Stuff that is really difficult to do
if you don't have that separation.
In some scenarios you might want
to use a server load function and
a universal load function together.
For example, you might need to return some
data from the server, but you also need to
return a value that cannot be serialized
as server data, like a component.
So in this example,
we want to return a different component
from our universal load function,
based on whether some data that we
got from the server is cool or not.
So in our page js file, we can access
the data that is returned from here,
By grabbing the data
property from the event.
And we'll just replace
this false with data.cool.
Right, and because the data that we're
getting from the server is cool,
we're now able to import the cool
component instead of the boring component.
It's still saying to-do add
a message because the universal load
function is replacing the data that was
returned from the server load function.
They're not getting mixed together.
So here we need to replace
the placeholder with data.message.
And so now we have a universal load
function that is returning data directly
from the server.
Earlier when we were looking at layout
data, we saw that if a layout load
function returns some data,
it's accessible within that layout.svelte
component, but it's also accessible
within every child page.svelte component.
But sometimes it's useful for
the load functions themselves to be able
to get access to data from their parents,
and this can be done with
something called await parent.
And to show how this works,
we're gonna sum two numbers that
come from different load functions.
We have a layout load, and
then we have another layout load here, and
then we have a page load.
So inside our root layout server js,
we're gonna return a value.
That is a : 1.
Right, and so this sum page here,
which is referring to the data that is
combined from the different layout and
page load functions is showing
data.a now has a value.
And we can get that data in our
sum/layout.js load function.
First, grab the parent property.
And then, get the value of
a from the parent layout load.
And we can now return a value
that depends on that value.
B is a plus one.
And you'll see that b is now populating
data b and our page.svelte component.
You'll notice here that the root layout
is using a layout server js file,
ie, a server load function,
whereas the sumLayout is just layout.js.
So this is a universal load function.
A universal load function can get parent
data from a parent server load function,
but the reverse is not true.
If we had layout.js in the root and
layout.server.js inside the sum root,
then we would not be able
to access parent data.
And then finally,
in the page load function,
we can get the parent data from
both of the parent load functions.
Again, we're gonna grab parent here and
we'll do [a, b] = await parent.
And we'll return c is the value of a + b.
Right, it's a bit of a contrived example.
It's not something that you're
gonna encounter often, but
it's a useful thing to have in
your toolkit when you do need it.
One thing that you do need to be aware
of is that all of these load functions
are running in parallel, that's so
that we get the data as fast as possible.
But if you start using await parent,
then that essentially means that
everything that happens after that line in
your load function is waterfalled on the
completion of the parent load functions.
And so if you're doing any other
asynchronous work inside your load
function, like fetching data from an API
or something, then you're gonna wanna
make sure that you do that before you call
await parent, if it's possible to do so.
>> Are there any performance benefits
to loading components from a page.js,
rather than importing them as
modules directly into the route?
In SvelteKit 1, it was mentioned as
opposed to other frameworks like Next,
SvelteKit defaults to
client side navigation
after the initial server
rendered page load.
Does that mean that on the initial load
Svelte will send the JavaScript for
the entire site as opposed to Next where
you'll hit a server for each navigation?
Or will it download the JavaScript for
that, for each route independently?
>> We use route-based code splitting in
SvelteKit, so when you hit the first page,
you will get the JavaScript that's
needed for any interaction on that page.
And you'll get the client side router so
that SvelteKit can navigate to new pages,
but you will not get the code for
subsequent route.
You only get that once
the navigation begins.
So it's all split up in a mathematically
optimal way so that you're getting
the minimum amount of code that you
need to at each stage of the navigation.
You can use a service worker or
preloading to get more of your app if
you need to preload things eagerly,
but the default behavior is to
only get code when you need it.
>> Instead of doing import
component from component,
we can import the component from page.js
in a load function, as we just saw.
Are there any difference in performance
in terms of lazy loading components or
any other concept?
>> No, in either case,
the the navigation is gonna be blocked
on that component being imported.
And it really doesn't make any difference
whether it's a static import from
within a component file or
a dynamic Input inside your load function,
it's gonna have the same end result.
It's just that the dynamic import is
gonna be more work and harder to do.
So I would recommend using static imports
unless you have a reason to use a dynamic
import, because you'll have
an easier time that way.
So when the user navigates from one page
to another, SvelteKit calls your load
functions, but only if it thinks
that something has changed.
For example,
navigating between time zones in this
app causes the load function
in our page js to rerun.
So we see that we're getting
the time zone updated,
which is being reflected
in the H1 element there.
But the load function in our layout does
not rerun because as far as Svelte is
concerned, it wasn't
invalidated by the navigation.
It's not using anything here that is
relevant to that navigation between
different routes.
And we can fix that by manually
invalidating it using a function called
invalidate, which takes a URL and reruns
any load functions that depend on it.
So this load function here,
because we're calling fetch/api/now,
we know that this load function depends
on that resource, thes /api/now resource.
So let's go over to the page.svelte and
we'll add an unmount callback that
invalidates that resource once a second.
Import unMount from svelte.
I'm gonna import the invalidate
function from $app/navigation.
Then we'll create an unmount callback,
That sets up an interval.
It's gonna run once a second.
Make sure that you return
the clearance of all tear down.
And inside that interval,
we're gonna invalidate that resource.
Right, and
you'll see that the time is now updating.
As we navigate around the site,
the time zone inside this
function is being invalidated
independently of the other
load function which depends
on the API Now resource.
You can also pass a function to invalidate
instead of an individual string,
in which case you can invalidate based
on all of the URLs that the current load
functions depend on.
So in that example that we just saw, we
were registering that API now resource as
a dependency because we were fetching it.
But sometimes it's not
appropriate to use fetch,
in which case you can specify a dependency
manually with a function called depends.
And depends takes a URL, but
a URL doesn't need to be
an actual thing on the internet.
It can be just a signifier that we create.
So we can create custom
invalidation keys like data:now.
Inside our layout js, we're gonna get rid
of the fetch and replace it with depends.
And at the top of here,
we're gonna say depends data:now to tell
SvelteKit that this load function
depends on the data:now resource.
I'm just gonna get rid of all of
that stuff and just return date.now
directly from the server load function,
or from the load function.
And then we need to update the invalidate
call so that it's invalidating
the resource that we just created
instead of the API now resource.
So go into the interval and
change that to data:now.
Right, and
we're now invalidating that load function
without even hitting the network.
We're not getting
anything from the server.
We're just rerunning that
load function once a second.
All right, then finally,
there's the nuclear option.
We can invalidate everything on the page
in one go using a function called
invalidateAll.
So we'll get rid of the invalidate input
here, replace that with invalidateAll.
And here,
we'll just get rid of that resource and
specify invalidateAll instead.
And now we can get rid of
that artificial resource.
And now everything is
being reset once a second.
This is what's happening behind the scenes
when you use a progressively enhanced
form, right?
You will post some data to the server,
you will get something back.
SvelteKit is gonna conservatively assume
that something has changed in your app and
that there's probably some data that needs
to be refreshed as a result of that.
So anytime you submit data
with the use enhance action,
SvelteKit is just gonna invalidate
everything, unless you tell it not to.